---
title: How the Internet Works
description: Understanding the fundamentals of internet infrastructure and data transmission
---

## Clients and Servers

So, you just moved and your wardrobe doesn't fit in your new apartment. Fun times! Thank goodness for FLÄTPÄK, your favorite Swedish furniture shop that delivers! You pull out the app, log in, and place your order. Your new wardrobe is on its way! But how does it get here? And how did a few button clicks on your phone turn into a delivery at your doorstep?

It starts with clients and servers. That app you just used is a client; that just means that it's software or a device that requests and displays data from a server. In our case, it *fetches* the digital catalogue of available furniture from FLÄTPÄK's servers and displays it to you. The servers hold the actual furniture data, process the *requests* from clients like your app, and deliver the appropriate response.

So now, you've placed your order; the servers processed it, but how does it get to you? Just like a furniture delivery, there's a set of infrastructure that gets your data where it needs to go. Let's load up the delivery truck and hit the road!

## The Information Superhighway (that makes me feel old)

### Internet Connection

Your delivery person doesn't transport magically to your door; they have to move through the streets, under tunnels, and over bridges to get to you. The internet is the same; it has to move through physical cables, copper or fiber optic, and wireless signals like WiFi or 5G signals, go through routers, and cell towers to get to you. You can think of WiFi, 5G, fiber optic, and copper cables as the roads, tunnels, and bridges of the internet. They are the physical infrastructure that allows data to travel from servers to clients. The cell towers and routers are the traffic lights and intersections that help direct the flow of data.

### IP Address

It would be pretty tough for FLÄTPÄK's delivery driver to find your door without an address. The internet is the same; it needs an address to find you. An IP address is like a postal address; it tells the internet where to send data. Your Public IP is like the street address of an apartment building. It tells the delivery driver where to find the building or your router; your router then uses your Private IP to find your device inside the building, like your apartment number tells the delivery driver which apartment door to knock on.

But not every device on the internet is directly accessible from the internet; your computer, your phone, your tablet have a private IP address that is used only on your local network. When connected to your router, your devices can communicate with each other using their private IP addresses but aren’t directly accessible from the internet.

Outside of your home network, your mobile devices have a public IP address that is used to connect to the internet. When you browse the web or send a message, your mobile device uses its public IP address to communicate with the internet. This is important to know because it means that your mobile device can reach the internet from anywhere in the world where you have a connection.

### Packets

Some things are too big to send all at once. Have you ever ordered a large wardrobe or furniture? They usually don't come in a single piece as that would be heavy, bulky, and generally difficult to transport. They come in multiple flat-pack boxes that are numbered and easy to assemble yourself. Smaller packets are easier to transport, can be split up in multiple delivery vehicles, and are less likely to get damaged during transit.

Getting a website, a large file, or a video stream is a similar process. When you request a website from a server, the server sends you packets of data that make up the website. The packets are numbered just like the FLÄTPÄK boxes to make it easy to reassemble. Once they've arrived, the packets are then reassembled on your device to display the website. This allows the data to take the shortest route, even if they don't all take the same path.

### TCP

Imagine getting a large wardrobe delivered in a bunch of boxes with no idea of what's what. What about not knowing when your order will arrive? Thankfully, we have package tracking with delivery estimates and numbered boxes so we know if everything arrived and is ready to assemble. TCP handles these things for your data.

Before sending anything, TCP first makes sure the connection is established with a three-way *handshake*; "hey, you there?" "yep, I'm here" "cool, let's go." This is where both sides agree everything is good to go and the data can be sent. Then it makes sure everything arrives and checks them off the list. "Box 1 of 7, got it. Box 2, got it. Box 4... wait, where's box 3?" If a packet is missing, TCP will request it again until all packets are received. It also keeps things in order if packets arrive in a different order because they took different routes. It holds and sorts packets until they are in the correct order before delivering them to the application.

### DNS

Your delivery driver knows there's a package at the FLÄTPÄK warehouse. They check their recently visited addresses, but it's not there. Next, they pull out their phone and look up FLÄTPÄK in their favorite Maps app. The app checks against the FLÄTPÄK's in the area, finding the warehouse's address. DNS, or Domain Name System, works similarly. On request, it checks if it knows the IP for your domain name and returns it if it does. If it doesn’t know, it checks the next DNS server in the chain until it’s found or the chain is exhausted. We'll get more into this in the DNS section.

### HTTP

Now that we understand the infrastructure and our driver knows how to get what from A to B, we can look at how the actual order is placed. If you're going to be placing an order, or really talking to anyone, it really helps if you're both speaking the same language. That's what HTTP is for; it's a protocol, or the agreed language that lets the client and server communicate. HTTP defines the format of the requests and responses.

On your phone or computer, you go to the FLÄTPÄK website by typing `https://www.FLAETPAEK.com`. The `https` tells the browser that we're using the secure version of HTTP. This is a security layer on top of HTTP that adds encryption and other protections, making the websites and data more secure and trustworthy. Most modern browsers won’t let you view standard HTTP anymore by default. Your browser then sends a request to the FLÄTPÄK servers, there’s a TCP handshake, and the connection is made. The server processes the request and sends the website data back in a response. Requests and responses have similar formats; they both have `headers` and a `body`. The headers tell about where the request or response is coming from and what type of data is in the body. 

### Websites and Apps

*Ding, dong* It's your FLÄTPÄK delivery! Your driver brings in box after box, you make sure everything is there and sign off, and now you have to assemble everything. You pull out the instruction manual and it walks you through how to build everything up, what goes where, and how it's put together. Your browser does the same thing with the data packets from a website request. It gets packets of HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and assets like images and videos. The HTML is like the instruction manual. It lays everything out and links the CSS, JavaScript, and assets together. This gets put together in the browser for you. An app on your phone is usually different. The app is like a prebuilt shelf system where mostly only data is requested, the shelves are there, the server fills them with your account info, product listings, chat data, etc.

### Continue Exploring

From placing an order to assembling the flat-pack, I hope you enjoy your new wardrobe, bookshelf, or loft bed of internet knowledge. Check back soon for more.
